It is my privilege to address you this afternoon on a subject in which
science and poetry are blended in a happy conjunction. If there be a
peculiar fascination about the earlier chapters of any branch of
history, how great must be the interest which attaches to that most
primeval of all terrestrial histories which relates to the actual
beginnings of this globe on which we stand.

In our efforts to grope into the dim recesses of this awful past, we
want the aid of some steadfast light which shall illumine the dark
places without the treachery of the will-o'-the-wisp. In the absence
of that steadfast light, vague conjectures as to the beginning of
things could never be entitled to any more respect than was due to
mere matters of speculation.

Of late, however, the required light has been to some considerable
extent forthcoming, and the attempt has been made, with no little
success, to elucidate a most interesting and wonderful chapter of an
exceedingly remote history. To chronicle this history is the object of
the present lectures before this Institution.

First, let us be fully aware of the extraordinary remoteness of that
period of which our history treats. To attempt to define that period
chronologically would be utterly futile. When we have stated that it
is more ancient than almost any other period which we can discuss, we
have expressed all that we are really entitled to say. Yet this
conveys not a little. It directs us to look back through all the ages
of modern human history, through the great days of ancient Greece and
Rome, back through the times when Egypt and Assyria were names of
renown, through the days when Nineveh and Babylon were mighty and
populous cities in the zenith of their glory. Back earlier still to
those more ancient nations of which we know hardly anything, and
still earlier to the prehistoric man, of whom we know less; back,
finally, to the days when man first trod on this planet, untold ages
ago. Here is indeed a portentous retrospect from most points of view,
but it is only the commencement of that which our subject suggests.

For man is but the final product of the long anterior ages during
which the development of life seems to have undergone an exceedingly
gradual elevation. Our retrospect now takes its way along the vistas
opened up by the geologists. We look through the protracted tertiary
ages, when mighty animals, now generally extinct, roamed over the
continents. Back still earlier through those wondrous secondary
periods, where swamps or oceans often covered what is now dry land,
and where mighty reptiles of uncouth forms stalked and crawled and
swam through the old world and the new. Back still earlier through
those vitally significant ages when the sunbeams were being garnered
and laid aside for man's use in the great forests, which were
afterwards preserved by being transformed into seams of coal. Back
still earlier through endless thousands of years, when lustrous
fishes abounded in the oceans; back again to those periods
characterized by the lower types of life; and still earlier to that
incredibly remote epoch when life itself began to dawn on our
awakening globe. Even here the epoch of our present history can hardly
be said to have been reached. We have to look through a long
succession of ages still antecedent. The geologist, who has hitherto
guided our view, cannot render us much further assistance; but the
physicist is at hand--he teaches us that the warm globe on which life
is beginning has passed in its previous stages through every phase of
warmth, of fervour, of glowing heat, of incandescence, and of actual
fusion; and thus at last our retrospect reaches to that particular
period of our earth's past history which is specially illustrated by
the modern doctrine of Time and Tide.

The present is the clue to the past. It is the steady application of
this principle which has led to such epoch-making labours as those by
which Lyell disclosed the origin of the earth's crust, Darwin the
origin of species, Max MÃ¼ller the origin of language. In our present
subject the course is equally clear. Study exactly what is going on at
present, and then have the courage to apply consistently and
rigorously what we have learned from the present to the interpretation
of the past.

Thus we begin with the ripple of the tide on the sea-beach which we
see to-day. The ebb and the flow of the tide are the present
manifestations of an agent which has been constantly at work. Let that
present teach us what tides must have done in the indefinite past.

It has been known from the very earliest times that the moon and the
tides were connected together--connected, I say, for a great advance
had to be made in human knowledge before it would have been possible
to understand the true relation between the tides and the moon.
Indeed, that relation is so far from being of an obvious character,
that I think I have read of a race who felt some doubt as to whether
the moon was the cause of the tides, or the tides the cause of the
moon. I should, however, say that the moon is not the sole agent
engaged in producing this periodic movement of our waters. The sun
also arouses a tide, but the solar tide is so small in comparison with
that produced by the moon, that for our present purpose we may leave
it out of consideration. We must, however, refer to the solar tide at
a later period of our discourses, for it will be found to have played
a very splendid part at the initial stage of the Earth-Moon History,
while in the remote future it will again rise into prominence.

It will be well to set forth a few preliminary figures which shall
explain how it comes to pass that the efficiency of the sun as a
tide-producing agent is so greatly inferior to that of the moon.
Indeed, considering that the sun has a mass so stupendous, that it
controls the entire planetary system, how is it that a body so
insignificant as the moon can raise a bigger tide on the ocean than
can the sun, of which the mass is 26,000,000 times as great as that of
our satellite?

This apparent paradox will disappear when we enunciate the law
according to which the efficiency of a tide-producing agent is to be
estimated. This law is somewhat different from the familiar form in
which the law of gravitation is expressed. The gravitation between two
distant masses is to be measured by multiplying these masses together,
and dividing the product by the _square_ of the distance. The law for
expressing the efficiency of a tide-producing agent varies not
according to the inverse square, but according to the inverse _cube_
of the distance. This difference in the expression of the law will
suffice to account for the superiority of the moon as a tide-producer
over the sun. The moon's distance on an average is about one 386th
part of that of the sun, and thus it is easy to show that so far as
the mere attraction of gravitation is concerned, the efficiency of the
sun's force on the earth is about one hundred and seventy-five times
as great as the force with which the moon attracts the earth. That is
of course calculated under the law of the inverse square. To determine
the tidal efficiency we have to divide this by three hundred and
eighty-six, and thus we see that the tidal efficiency of the sun is
less than half that of the moon.

When the solar tide and the lunar tide are acting in unison, they
conspire to produce very high tides and very low tides, or, as we
call them, spring tides. On the other hand, when the sun is so placed
as to give us a low tide while the moon is producing a high tide, the
net result that we actually experience is merely the excess of the
lunar tide over the solar tide; these are what we call neap tides. In
fact, by very careful and long-continued observations of the rise and
fall of the tides at a particular port, it becomes possible to
determine with accuracy the relative ranges of spring tides and neap
tides; and as the spring tides are produced by moon plus sun, while
the neap tides are produced by moon minus sun, we obtain a means of
actually weighing the relative masses of the sun and moon. This is one
of the remarkable facts which can be deduced from a prolonged study of
the tides.

The demonstration of the law of the tide-producing force is of a
mathematical character, and I do not intend in these lectures to enter
into mathematical calculations. There is, however, a simple line of
reasoning which, though it falls far short of actual demonstration,
may yet suffice to give a plausible reason for the law.

The tides really owe their origin to the fact that the tide-producing
agent operates more powerfully on those parts of the tide-exhibiting
body which are near to it, than on the more distant portions of the
same. The nearer the two bodies are together, the larger
proportionally will be the differences in the distances of its various
parts from the tide-producing body; and on this account the leverage,
so to speak, of the action by which the tides are produced is
increased. For instance, if the two bodies were brought within half
their original distance of each other, the relative size of each body,
as viewed from the other, will be doubled; and what we have called the
leverage of the tide-producing ability will be increased twofold. The
gravitation also between the two bodies is increased fourfold when the
distance is halved, and consequently, the tide-producing ability is
doubled for one reason, and increased fourfold again by another;
hence, the tides will be increased eightfold when the distance is
reduced to one half. Now, as eight is the cube of two, this
illustration may be taken as a verification of the law, that the
efficiency of a body as a tide-producer varies inversely as the cube
of the distance between it and the body on which the tides are being
raised.
